docs/GETTING_STARTED.md, before:

# Getting Started Guide

## Table of Contents

- [Getting the Source Code](#getting-the-source-code)
- [Installing Nix](#installing-nix)
- [Quick Start with Nix](#quick-start-with-nix-recommended)
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Using Nix (Recommended)](#using-nix-recommended)
  - [Manual Installation](#manual-installation)
  - [After Building](#after-building)
    - [WebAssembly Targets](#webassembly-targets)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Command Line Interface](#command-line-interface)
  - [Core Commands](#core-commands)
  - [Advanced Commands](#advanced-commands)
  - [Project Management](#project-management)
  - [Global Options](#global-options)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)

This guide covers installing OtterLang on various platforms. The easiest way is using Nix, but manual installation is also supported.

## Getting the Source Code

First, clone the OtterLang repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang
```

Now you're ready to build OtterLang. Choose one of the installation methods below.

## Installing Nix

If you plan to use Nix (recommended), you'll need to install it first. Nix is a package manager that provides a reproducible development environment.

### macOS and Linux

The easiest way to install Nix is using the official installer:

```bash
# Run the Nix installer
sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --daemon
```

After installation, restart your terminal or run:

```bash
. ~/.nix-profile/etc/profile.d/nix.sh
```

### Windows

On Windows, you can use Nix through WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux) or use NixOS in a virtual machine. Alternatively, you can follow the manual installation instructions below.

For more detailed installation instructions, visit the [official Nix installation guide](https://nixos.org/download.html).

### Verifying Nix Installation

After installing Nix, verify it's working:

```bash
nix --version
```

You should see the Nix version number. If you encounter any issues, refer to the [Nix troubleshooting guide](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/installing-binary.html#troubleshooting).

## Quick Start with Nix (Recommended)

Nix provides a reproducible development environment with all dependencies:

```bash
# Enter the development environment
nix develop

# Build the compiler (nightly toolchain is set as default in Nix)
cargo build --release
```

The Nix flake automatically provides:
- Rust nightly toolchain
- LLVM 18 with WebAssembly support
- All required system dependencies

This is the recommended approach for development and ensures consistent builds across different systems.

## Manual Installation

If you prefer not to use Nix, you can install dependencies manually.

### Prerequisites

- **Rust nightly**: Required for FFI features
- **LLVM 18**: For code generation and WebAssembly support

### macOS

```bash
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install LLVM 18
brew install llvm@18

# Set environment variables
export LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX=$(brew --prefix llvm@18)
export LLVM_SYS_180_PREFIX=$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX
export PATH="$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX/bin:$PATH"

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

### Ubuntu/Debian

```bash
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install LLVM 18
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y llvm-18 llvm-18-dev clang-18

# Set environment variables
export LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX=/usr/lib/llvm-18
export LLVM_SYS_180_PREFIX=$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

### Fedora/RHEL

```bash
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install LLVM 18
sudo dnf -y install llvm18 llvm18-devel clang18

# Set environment variables
export LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX=/usr/lib64/llvm18
export LLVM_SYS_180_PREFIX=$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

### Windows

The included Powershell script `setup.ps1` prepares your environment to build Otter. Namely it does the following:

1. Inits the Visual Studio dev shell, which includes needed environment variables.
2. Downloads LLVM 18.
3. Download libxml2.
4. Setups up PATH and other environment variables so the compiler knows where to find llvm and libxml2.

LLVM and libxml2 are installed in the `contrib` folder, which is created by this script. Keep in mind that this script needs to be run in any new powershell instance before building, as it's changes are not permanent.


```powershell
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Run setup script
./setup.ps1

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

## After Building

Once the build completes successfully, the `otter` binary will be available at `target/release/otter`.

### Running Programs

```bash
# Run a program directly
./target/release/otter run examples/basic/hello.ot

# Or using cargo
cargo +nightly run --release --bin otter -- run examples/basic/hello.ot
```

### Building Executables

```bash
# Build a standalone executable
./target/release/otter build examples/basic/hello.ot -o hello
```

#### WebAssembly Targets

OtterLang can compile programs to WebAssembly (WASM) for running in web browsers or other WASM runtimes.

**Basic WebAssembly (no WASI):**
```bash
otter build program.ot --target wasm32-unknown-unknown -o program.wasm
```

**WebAssembly with WASI support:**
```bash
otter build program.ot --target wasm32-wasi -o program.wasm
```

**Target Differences:**

- **`wasm32-wasi`** - WebAssembly System Interface
  - Best for: Server-side WASM, command-line tools, WASI-compatible runtimes
  - Full WASI support: Direct access to stdio, filesystem, networking, and other system APIs
  - Runtime compatibility: Works in any WASI-compatible runtime (wasmtime, WasmEdge, etc.)

- **`wasm32-unknown-unknown`** - Bare WebAssembly
  - Best for: Web browsers, embedded systems, custom host environments
  - Minimal imports: Only requires a few host functions for I/O
  - Smaller binaries: No WASI runtime overhead
  - Browser compatible: Can run directly in web browsers with appropriate host

**Requirements:**
- LLVM 18 with WebAssembly target support
- `clang` and `wasm-ld` in your PATH (included with LLVM installations)

**Limitations:**
- Garbage Collection: WASM modules use OtterLang's built-in GC, which may have different performance characteristics than native execution
- FFI: Foreign function interface is limited in WASM environments
- File I/O: Direct filesystem access requires WASI or host-provided APIs
- Concurrency: Task spawning works but may have limitations in constrained environments
- Many stdlib modules (`io`, `net`, `task`) are unavailable in WASM targets

**Examples:**
```bash
# Build examples for WebAssembly
otter build examples/basic/hello.ot --target wasm32-unknown-unknown -o hello.wasm
otter build examples/basic/fibonacci.ot --target wasm32-wasi -o fibonacci.wasm

# Run with wasmtime (WASI)
wasmtime fibonacci.wasm
```

### Testing

```bash
# Run the test suite
cargo +nightly test --release

# Run specific tests
cargo +nightly test --release test_name
```

### Troubleshooting

**Nix builds with libffi errors:**
If you get "libffi.so.8" errors when running outside Nix, use the Nix environment:
```bash
nix develop
./target/release/otter run program.ot
```

**Windows path issues:**
Ensure you're using the Visual Studio Developer Command Prompt with proper MSVC environment variables.

## Command Line Interface

OtterLang provides a comprehensive CLI tool for running, building, and managing OtterLang programs.

### Usage

```bash
otter [COMMAND] [OPTIONS] [FILE]
```

### Core Commands

#### `run` - Execute a Program

Run an OtterLang program directly.

```bash
otter run program.ot [options]
```

**Options:**
- `--debug` - Enable debug mode with additional logging
- `--quiet` - Suppress non-error output
- `--lib-path <PATH>` - Add directory to library search path

**Examples:**
```bash
otter run hello.ot
otter run --debug myprogram.ot
```

#### `build` - Compile to Executable

Compile an OtterLang program to a native executable or WebAssembly.

```bash
otter build program.ot [options]
```

**Options:**
- `-o, --output <FILE>` - Output file path
- `--target <TARGET>` - Compilation target (`native`, `wasm32-unknown-unknown`, `wasm32-wasi`)
- `--release` - Enable release optimizations

**Examples:**
```bash
otter build hello.ot
otter build program.ot -o myapp
otter build app.ot --target wasm32-unknown-unknown -o app.wasm
```

#### `fmt` - Format Code

Format OtterLang source code according to standard style guidelines.

```bash
otter fmt [files...] [options]
```

**Options:**
- `--check` - Check if files are formatted correctly (don't modify)

**Examples:**
```bash
otter fmt source.ot
otter fmt --check *.ot
```

#### `repl` - Interactive REPL

Start an interactive Read-Eval-Print Loop for experimenting with OtterLang code.

```bash
otter repl [options]
```

### Advanced Commands

#### `test` - Run Tests

Execute unit tests and integration tests.

```bash
otter test [options] [pattern]
```

#### `profile` - Performance Profiling

Profile program execution for performance analysis.

```bash
otter profile <SUBCOMMAND> program.ot [options]
```

**Subcommands:** `memory`, `cpu`, `alloc`

#### `lsp` - Language Server

Start the OtterLang Language Server Protocol (LSP) server for editor integration.

```bash
otter lsp [options]
```

### Project Management

#### `new` - Create New Project

Create a new OtterLang project with standard directory structure.

```bash
otter new <NAME> [options]
```

#### `check` - Type Check

Check program for type errors without running it.

```bash
otter check program.ot [options]
```

### Global Options

These options can be used with any command:

- `-h, --help` - Show help information
- `-V, --version` - Show version information
- `--verbose` - Enable verbose output
- `--quiet` - Suppress informational output

### Environment Variables

- `OTTER_LOG` - Set logging level
- `OTTER_FFI_CACHE` - FFI bridge cache directory
- `OTTER_LIB_PATH` - Additional library search paths

**LLVM not found:**
Verify that `LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX` points to the correct LLVM installation directory and that LLVM binaries are in your PATH.

Commit message:

feat: add garbage collection controls to CLI and documentation

docs/GETTING_STARTED.md, after:

# Getting Started Guide

## Table of Contents

- [Getting the Source Code](#getting-the-source-code)
- [Installing Nix](#installing-nix)
- [Quick Start with Nix](#quick-start-with-nix-recommended)
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Using Nix (Recommended)](#using-nix-recommended)
  - [Manual Installation](#manual-installation)
  - [After Building](#after-building)
    - [WebAssembly Targets](#webassembly-targets)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Command Line Interface](#command-line-interface)
  - [Core Commands](#core-commands)
  - [Advanced Commands](#advanced-commands)
  - [Project Management](#project-management)
  - [Global Options](#global-options)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)

This guide covers installing OtterLang on various platforms. The easiest way is using Nix, but manual installation is also supported.

## Getting the Source Code

First, clone the OtterLang repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang
```

Now you're ready to build OtterLang. Choose one of the installation methods below.

## Installing Nix

If you plan to use Nix (recommended), you'll need to install it first. Nix is a package manager that provides a reproducible development environment.

### macOS and Linux

The easiest way to install Nix is using the official installer:

```bash
# Run the Nix installer
sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --daemon
```

After installation, restart your terminal or run:

```bash
. ~/.nix-profile/etc/profile.d/nix.sh
```

### Windows

On Windows, you can use Nix through WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux) or use NixOS in a virtual machine. Alternatively, you can follow the manual installation instructions below.

For more detailed installation instructions, visit the [official Nix installation guide](https://nixos.org/download.html).

### Verifying Nix Installation

After installing Nix, verify it's working:

```bash
nix --version
```

You should see the Nix version number. If you encounter any issues, refer to the [Nix troubleshooting guide](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/installing-binary.html#troubleshooting).

## Quick Start with Nix (Recommended)

Nix provides a reproducible development environment with all dependencies:

```bash
# Enter the development environment
nix develop

# Build the compiler (nightly toolchain is set as default in Nix)
cargo build --release
```

The Nix flake automatically provides:
- Rust nightly toolchain
- LLVM 18 with WebAssembly support
- All required system dependencies

This is the recommended approach for development and ensures consistent builds across different systems.

## Manual Installation

If you prefer not to use Nix, you can install dependencies manually.

### Prerequisites

- **Rust nightly**: Required for FFI features
- **LLVM 18**: For code generation and WebAssembly support

### macOS

```bash
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install LLVM 18
brew install llvm@18

# Set environment variables
export LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX=$(brew --prefix llvm@18)
export LLVM_SYS_180_PREFIX=$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX
export PATH="$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX/bin:$PATH"

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

### Ubuntu/Debian

```bash
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install LLVM 18
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y llvm-18 llvm-18-dev clang-18

# Set environment variables
export LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX=/usr/lib/llvm-18
export LLVM_SYS_180_PREFIX=$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

### Fedora/RHEL

```bash
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install LLVM 18
sudo dnf -y install llvm18 llvm18-devel clang18

# Set environment variables
export LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX=/usr/lib64/llvm18
export LLVM_SYS_180_PREFIX=$LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

### Windows

The included Powershell script `setup.ps1` prepares your environment to build Otter. Namely it does the following:

1. Inits the Visual Studio dev shell, which includes needed environment variables.
2. Downloads LLVM 18.
3. Download libxml2.
4. Setups up PATH and other environment variables so the compiler knows where to find llvm and libxml2.

LLVM and libxml2 are installed in the `contrib` folder, which is created by this script. Keep in mind that this script needs to be run in any new powershell instance before building, as it's changes are not permanent.


```powershell
# Clone the repository (if you haven't already)
git clone https://github.com/jonathanmagambo/otterlang.git
cd otterlang

# Install Rust nightly
rustup toolchain install nightly

# Run setup script
./setup.ps1

# Build OtterLang
cargo +nightly build --release
```

## After Building

Once the build completes successfully, the `otter` binary will be available at `target/release/otter`.

### Running Programs

```bash
# Run a program directly
./target/release/otter run examples/basic/hello.ot

# Or using cargo
cargo +nightly run --release --bin otter -- run examples/basic/hello.ot
```

### Building Executables

```bash
# Build a standalone executable
./target/release/otter build examples/basic/hello.ot -o hello
```

#### WebAssembly Targets

OtterLang can compile programs to WebAssembly (WASM) for running in web browsers or other WASM runtimes.

**Basic WebAssembly (no WASI):**
```bash
otter build program.ot --target wasm32-unknown-unknown -o program.wasm
```

**WebAssembly with WASI support:**
```bash
otter build program.ot --target wasm32-wasi -o program.wasm
```

**Target Differences:**

- **`wasm32-wasi`** - WebAssembly System Interface
  - Best for: Server-side WASM, command-line tools, WASI-compatible runtimes
  - Full WASI support: Direct access to stdio, filesystem, networking, and other system APIs
  - Runtime compatibility: Works in any WASI-compatible runtime (wasmtime, WasmEdge, etc.)

- **`wasm32-unknown-unknown`** - Bare WebAssembly
  - Best for: Web browsers, embedded systems, custom host environments
  - Minimal imports: Only requires a few host functions for I/O
  - Smaller binaries: No WASI runtime overhead
  - Browser compatible: Can run directly in web browsers with appropriate host

**Requirements:**
- LLVM 18 with WebAssembly target support
- `clang` and `wasm-ld` in your PATH (included with LLVM installations)

**Limitations:**
- Garbage Collection: WASM modules use OtterLang's built-in GC, which may have different performance characteristics than native execution
- FFI: Foreign function interface is limited in WASM environments
- File I/O: Direct filesystem access requires WASI or host-provided APIs
- Concurrency: Task spawning works but may have limitations in constrained environments
- Many stdlib modules (`io`, `net`, `task`) are unavailable in WASM targets

**Examples:**
```bash
# Build examples for WebAssembly
otter build examples/basic/hello.ot --target wasm32-unknown-unknown -o hello.wasm
otter build examples/basic/fibonacci.ot --target wasm32-wasi -o fibonacci.wasm

# Run with wasmtime (WASI)
wasmtime fibonacci.wasm
```

### Testing

```bash
# Run the test suite
cargo +nightly test --release

# Run specific tests
cargo +nightly test --release test_name
```

### Troubleshooting

**Nix builds with libffi errors:**
If you get "libffi.so.8" errors when running outside Nix, use the Nix environment:
```bash
nix develop
./target/release/otter run program.ot
```

**Windows path issues:**
Ensure you're using the Visual Studio Developer Command Prompt with proper MSVC environment variables.

## Command Line Interface

OtterLang provides a comprehensive CLI tool for running, building, and managing OtterLang programs.

### Usage

```bash
otter [COMMAND] [OPTIONS] [FILE]
```

### Core Commands

#### `run` - Execute a Program

Run an OtterLang program directly.

```bash
otter run program.ot [options]
```

**Options:**
- `--debug` - Enable debug mode with additional logging
- `--quiet` - Suppress non-error output
- `--lib-path <PATH>` - Add directory to library search path

**Examples:**
```bash
otter run hello.ot
otter run --debug myprogram.ot
```

#### `build` - Compile to Executable

Compile an OtterLang program to a native executable or WebAssembly.

```bash
otter build program.ot [options]
```

**Options:**
- `-o, --output <FILE>` - Output file path
- `--target <TARGET>` - Compilation target (`native`, `wasm32-unknown-unknown`, `wasm32-wasi`)
- `--release` - Enable release optimizations

**Examples:**
```bash
otter build hello.ot
otter build program.ot -o myapp
otter build app.ot --target wasm32-unknown-unknown -o app.wasm
```

#### `fmt` - Format Code

Format OtterLang source code according to standard style guidelines.

```bash
otter fmt [files...] [options]
```

**Options:**
- `--check` - Check if files are formatted correctly (don't modify)

**Examples:**
```bash
otter fmt source.ot
otter fmt --check *.ot
```

#### `repl` - Interactive REPL

Start an interactive Read-Eval-Print Loop for experimenting with OtterLang code.

```bash
otter repl [options]
```

### Advanced Commands

#### `test` - Run Tests

Execute unit tests and integration tests.

```bash
otter test [options] [pattern]
```

#### `profile` - Performance Profiling

Profile program execution for performance analysis.

```bash
otter profile <SUBCOMMAND> program.ot [options]
```

**Subcommands:** `memory`, `cpu`, `alloc`

#### `lsp` - Language Server

Start the OtterLang Language Server Protocol (LSP) server for editor integration.

```bash
otter lsp [options]
```

### Project Management

#### `new` - Create New Project

Create a new OtterLang project with standard directory structure.

```bash
otter new <NAME> [options]
```

#### `check` - Type Check

Check program for type errors without running it.

```bash
otter check program.ot [options]
```

### Global Options

These options can be used with any command:

- `-h, --help` - Show help information
- `-V, --version` - Show version information
- `--verbose` - Enable verbose output
- `--quiet` - Suppress informational output

#### Garbage Collection Controls

All commands that execute Otter code accept GC tuning flags:

- `--gc-strategy <strategy>` – choose between `rc`, `mark-sweep`, `generational`, or `none`.
- `--gc-threshold <fraction>` – override the heap usage threshold (0.0–1.0) that triggers a collection.
- `--gc-interval-ms <ms>` – force a periodic GC cycle; set to `0` to disable interval-based cycles.
- `--gc-disabled-max-bytes <bytes>` – cap allocations allowed while GC is disabled.

Passing these flags is equivalent to setting the matching `OTTER_GC_*` environment variables for the spawned program. See `docs/GC_GUIDE.md` for a deeper discussion of collectors, root registration, and arenas.

### Environment Variables

- `OTTER_LOG` - Set logging level
- `OTTER_FFI_CACHE` - FFI bridge cache directory
- `OTTER_LIB_PATH` - Additional library search paths
- `OTTER_GC_STRATEGY` - Same as `--gc-strategy`
- `OTTER_GC_THRESHOLD` - Same as `--gc-threshold`
- `OTTER_GC_INTERVAL` - Same as `--gc-interval-ms`
- `OTTER_GC_DISABLED_MAX_BYTES` - Same as `--gc-disabled-max-bytes`

**LLVM not found:**
Verify that `LLVM_SYS_181_PREFIX` points to the correct LLVM installation directory and that LLVM binaries are in your PATH.
